# Call Graph Generator

## Overview

A call graph is a directed graph that represents relationships between
functions of a program. The nodes (vertices) of the graph are functions
defined within the program (or its dependencies). A directed edge from some 
`node1` to some `node2` represents that `node1` calls `node2` at some point 
in the program.

In addition, the call graph generated by MIRAI includes type information 
as part of the edges of the graph. Supposing `node1` calls `node2` with two
arguments, having types `t1` and `t2`, respectively, there will be two edges
in the call graph between `node` and `node2`, each edge labeled with one of the
two tyoes.

MIRAI derives the call graph of a program through _static_ analysis
(see [this documentation](documentation/Overview.md) for an overview of MIRAI). 
As such the derived call graph is not guaranteed to be precise; it may not
always be possible to determine which functions are called in the presence of
indirection. However, benchmarking (see the section below titled
"Resolved calls") indicates the generated call graph is highly precise.

After the target program is statically analyzed, MIRAI
supports output of the generated call graph in two output formats:
- `dot`: for use with Graphviz to create a visualization of the call graph.
- `ddlog`: the call graph in the form of Datalog input relations.

Please see their respective sections below for more information.


## Resolved calls

MIRAI's call graph generation is highly precise; correctly resolving calls to
all of the tests in the 
[call graph generator benchmark](https://github.com/ktrianta/rust-callgraph-benchmark).

Below we present the results of MIRAI on the benchmark:

| Call type              | Resolved %       | 
| ---------------------- | ----------------:|
| static dispatch        |             100% |
| dynamic dispatch       |             100% |
| generic                |             100% |
| function pointer       |             100% |
| macro                  |             100% |
| conditionally compiled |              50% |

In all cases but "conditionally compiled", MIRAI is able to resolve all of the
calls. For the "conditionally compiled", MIRAI receives a 50% score because
conditional compilation is performed by Cargo before MIRAI is invoked
(see the [Architecture documentation](documentation/Architecture.md)). MIRAI
does not have access to the functions that were not included in the conditional
compilation. For the calls that are included, MIARI does resolve them.


## Configuration

MIRAI's call graph generator output can be configured with the CLI option
`--call_graph_config <path_to_config>`. A valid JSON configuration file must exist
at that path using the following schema:
```
{
    "dot_output_path": "path/to/graph.dot",
    "ddlog_output_path": "path/to/graph.dat",
    "type_map_output_path": "path/to/types.json",
    "type_relations_path": "path/to/type_relations.json",
    "reductions": [
        {"Slice": "function name"},
        "Fold",
        "Clean",
        "Deduplicate",
    ],
    "included_crates": ["crate_name"]
}
```

Below, we explain each field in detail:
- `"dot_output_path"`: (**Optional**) Path where dot output of graph will be saved,
if provided. See the section below on "Dot output".
- `"ddlog_output_path"`: (**Optional**) Path where Datalog output of graph will be
saved, if provided. See the section below on "Datalog output".
- `"type_map_output_path"`: (**Optional**) Path where type map output of graph will
be saved, if provided. See the section below on "Type Map output".
- `"type_relations_path"`: (**Optional**) Path to file where manually-added type
relations will read from. See the section below on "Type relations"
- `"reductions"`: Possibly empty list of reductions to apply to the call graph. See the subsection below on "Graph reductions".
- `"included_crates"`: List of crate names to _include_ in the graph, 
if the `Fold` reduction is used. Can be empty if the `Fold` reduction is not being used.

### Graph reductions

A number of graph reductions are supported for the generated call graph. These
reductions reduce the size of the graph by excluding nodes and edges that may not be
relevant to the user in order to make the graph easier to read and analyze.

Four call graph reductions are supported:
1. `Slice(function_name)`: This reduction returns a sub-graph of nodes that are
reachable from the node associated with the given function name. Expected configuration format is: `{"Slice": "function name"}`.
2. `Fold`: This reduction removes all nodes that do not belong to at least one of
the crates specified in `"included_crates"`. If there exists a path from an
included node to another included node that goes through one or more excluded nodes,
that path is preserved through the creation of a new edge connecting the included
nodes. Expected configuration format is `"Fold"`.
3. `Deduplicate`: This reduction reduces the set of edges in the graph such that
each there exists at most one edge connecting any two nodes. This has the effect of
removing type information from the graph, and makes it more suitable for
visualization. Expected configuration format is `"Deduplicate"`.
4. `Clean`: This reduction removes *orphan nodes* from the graph. These are nodes
that have no incoming or outgoing edges. Expected configuration format is `"Clean"`.

Reductions may be specified in any order (and even multiple times), and they are
applied sequentially in the order specified.

## Dot output

The call graph generator supports dot output of the call graph. This output format
is intended for use with [Graphviz](https://graphviz.org/), which ingests the dot
file format to produce a visualization of the graph in multiple formats.

In this form nodes are labeled with their corresponding function name while edges
are not labeled. It is recommended to use the `Deduplicate` reduction to remove
extra edges between nodes.

Here is an example of the dot output:
```
digraph {
    0 [ label = "\"static[8787]::main\"" ]
    1 [ label = "\"static[8787]::fn1\"" ]
    2 [ label = "\"static[8787]::fn2\"" ]
    3 [ label = "\"static[8787]::fn3\"" ]
    0 -> 1 [ ]
    1 -> 2 [ ]
    2 -> 3 [ ]
}
```

Supposing this is stored in a file called `graph.dot`, this can be
used to produce a PDF of the graph using the graphviz `dot` tool:
```
$ dot -Tpdf graph.dot -o graph.pdf
```

## Datalog output

The call graph generator also supports 
[Datalog](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datalog) output of the call graph.
Datalog is a logic programming language that can be used, in conjunction with the
generated call graph, to write an analysis that operates on the call graph.

Here is an example of the Datalog output for the prior graph:
```
start;
insert Edge(0,0,1);
insert Edge(1,1,2);
insert Edge(2,2,3);
insert EdgeType(0,0);
insert EdgeType(1,0);
insert EdgeType(2,0);
commit;
```

The call graph generator generates two types of relations:
1. Graph relations: Specify properties about the graph itself.
2. Type relations: Specify properties about the types of the edges of the graph.

These relations are explained in detail below.

Note: To preserve type information it is recommended to **not** use the
`Deduplicate` reduction.

### Graph relations

There are three graph relations output by MIRAI:
1. `Edge(id,n1,n2)`: This specifies that there is a directed (call) edge from
`n1` to `n2`. The edge has the identifier `id`.
2. `EdgeType(id,t)`: This specifies that the edge with the identifier `id` has
type `t`.
3. `Dom(n1,n2)`: This specifies that call to node `n1` dominates the call to node
`n2` in the call graph of the function body where `n1` and `n2`are called.

Note that all identifiers of these relations, e.g., `id`, `n1`, `t`, are output
as `u32` indexes. Node indexes can be traced back to their associated function name
by looking at the dot file output. Type indexes can be traced back to an associated
type string but looking at the output Type Map.

### Type Map output

The output Datalog relations use indexes (unique identifiers) to refer to
nodes of the graph and types of edges. As explained above, node identifers can
be traced back to their function name by looking at the dot output of the call
graph generator.

Type indexes can be traced back to their associated type string by looking at the
output Type Map. Here is an example type map:
```
{
    "0": "u32",
    "1": "u8",
}
```
This map encodes that if relation is found that refers to the type `0`, e.g.,
`EdgeType(1,0)`, that relation is referring to the (Rust) type `u32`.

### Type relations

There are two type relations supported by MIRAI:
1. `EqType(t1,t2)`: This encodes that types `t1` and `t2` are equivalent for the 
purpose of analysis.
2. `Member(t1,t2`): This encodes that type `t2` is a "member" of type `t1`. This 
is more general than subtyping. For example, we might say that `T` is a "member" of `Vec<T>`.

Type relations are determined in two ways. First, the call graph generator includes
heuristics for deriving type relations for some common patterns. For example,
`Member(Vec<T>, T)` is always derived when a type `Vec<T>` is encountered (as long 
as type `T` by itself is used elsewhere in the program).

Second, type relations may be manually input via the path specified in the config
file: `type_relations_path`. This should be a path to a JSON file with the following schema:
```
{
    "relations": [
        {
            "kind": "Member" | "Eq",
            "rtype1": "T1",
            "rtype2": "T2"
        },
        ...
    ]    
}
```

A list of relations is provided. For each relation, its kind ("Member" or "Eq") is
specified and the two types of the relation are specified. Concrete types
(non-generic) must be used for the generated type relations to be included because
MIRAI produces concrete type information.


### Example: Reachability analysis

Below, we show a simple Datalog analysis that finds all nodes reachable
from a given node. In this example we use the 
[Differential Datalog](https://github.com/vmware/differential-datalog)
implementation of Datalog.

The Datalog analysis saved in `reachable.dl`:
```
input relation Edge(id: u32, node1: u32, node2: u32)
input relation EdgeType(id: u32, rtype: u32)

output relation Reachable(node1: u32, node2: u32)
Reachable(node1, node2) :- Edge(_, node1, node2).
Reachable(node1, node3) :- Edge(_, node1, node2), Reachable(node2, node3).
```

The call graph Datalog output generated by MIRAI (in `graph.dat`):
```
start;
insert Edge(0,0,1);
insert Edge(1,1,2);
insert Edge(2,2,3);
insert EdgeType(0,0);
insert EdgeType(1,0);
insert EdgeType(2,0);
commit;
dump Reachable;
```

To run the analysis with Differential Datalog:
```
ddlog -i reachable.dl &&
(cd base_ddlog && cargo build --release) &&
./reachable_ddlog/target/release/reachable_cli < ../graph.dat
```

Finally, the output:
```
Reachable{.node1 = 0, .node2 = 1}
Reachable{.node1 = 0, .node2 = 2}
Reachable{.node1 = 0, .node2 = 3}
Reachable{.node1 = 1, .node2 = 2}
Reachable{.node1 = 1, .node2 = 3}
Reachable{.node1 = 2, .node2 = 3}
```

As we can see, there is an output relation for every pair of nodes `n1`, `n2`
such that `n2` is reachable from `n1`.
